Cmake build (#2)
ACCESS-NRI/MOM6: CMakeLists.txt

cmake_minimum_required(VERSION 3.18)

#[==============================================================================[
#                         Basic project definition                              #
#]==============================================================================]
project(MOM6
        DESCRIPTION "Modular Ocean Model 6"
        HOMEPAGE_URL https://github.com/ACCESS-NRI/MOM6
        LANGUAGES C Fortran)

#[==============================================================================[
#                           Project configuration                               #
#]==============================================================================]
message(STATUS "Build options")

option(MOM6_ACCESS3   "Use ACCESS3 dependencies and install ACCESS3 libraries"  OFF)
option(MOM6_OPENMP    "Enable OpenMP threading"                                 OFF)
option(MOM6_ASYMMETRIC "Use MOM asymmetric memory"                              OFF)
message(STATUS "  - MOM6_ACCESS3     ${MOM6_ACCESS3}" )
message(STATUS "  - MOM6_OPENMP      ${MOM6_OPENMP}"  )
message(STATUS "  - MOM6_ASYMMETRIC  ${MOM6_ASYMMETRIC}")

if(MOM6_ACCESS3)

>   option(MOM6_CESMCOUPLED "Use CESMCOUPLED"                                     OFF)

Reviewer: I can't remember whether I'm now contradicting myself or not but...

Should this default to ON, given that it's only available with `MOM6_ACCESS3`?

Reviewer 2: I think i was optimistic the need for this would get removed one day ??

And I kind of like that by forcing users to set it they know its on.

Reviewer: Yeah fair. So are you thinking this will be set in the `spack.yaml`?

Reviewer 2: It's currently set in the `access3-exe` package. Not sure if I like that idea or not

Reviewer 3: This raises an interesting question: what happens if one tries to build OM3 with an installation of MOM6 that was compiled with `MOM6_CESMCOUPLED = OFF`? I guess OM3 would not compile, right?

Reviewer 2: I think CICE doesn't compile at all.

I'm not sure about MOM ... ill try it now

Reviewer 3: Thanks for checking this. If compilation fails, this is not too bad, because at least users won't get a wrong executable to run. But might be worth considering adding some safeguards.

Reviewer 2: Appears to build (the MOM6 lib and the access executable) fine with this OFF

Reviewer: It won't work in ACCESS-OM3 though right? So should we ensure that `MOM6_CESMCOUPLED = ON` when `MOM6_ACCESS3 = ON`?

Reviewer 2: > It won't work in ACCESS-OM3 though right?

It appears to build. Not sure it runs.

Reviewer 2: I think build with the nuopc driver and cesmcoupled off is a valid way to use MOM right? Its just not the way we use it

Reviewer: I'd be very surprised if it did.

Reviewer: > I think build with the nuopc driver and cesmcoupled off is a valid way to use MOM right? Its just not the way we use it

Yeah it is, but it's not really valid for OM3. The coupled fields are different for example

Reviewer 2: I think leaving the option available and setting in spack is ok then?

Maybe default should be ON, one less thing for us to forget if using Cmake directly ?

Reviewer 3: Maybe one should clarify what `MOM6_ACCESS3 = ON` means. If it just means to build with NUOPC coupling, then one should allow `MOM6_CESMCOUPLED = OFF` (and probably rename `MOM6_ACCESS3` to something else). If it means build for use in OM3, then probably `MOM6_CESMCOUPLED` should always be `ON` (in which case better to simply remove the option).

Reviewer 2: I guess even if someone else builds with nuopc coupling using cmeps/cdeps and share, its highly unlikely that they would use https://github.com/accESS-NRI/access3-share ?

I think you've convinced me - ill remove the option

# Copyright ACCESS-NRI and contributors. See the top-level LICENSE file for details.

cmake_minimum_required(VERSION 3.18)

#[==============================================================================[
#                         Basic project definition                              #
#]==============================================================================]
project(MOM6
        DESCRIPTION "Modular Ocean Model 6"
        HOMEPAGE_URL https://github.com/ACCESS-NRI/MOM6
        LANGUAGES C Fortran)

#[==============================================================================[
#                           Project configuration                               #
#]==============================================================================]
message(STATUS "Build options")

> option(ACCESS3_MOM6  "Use ACCESS3 dependencies and install ACCESS3 libraries" ON )

Reviewer: I wonder if the default for this should be OFF. To me it seems logical that a component build system should build standalone by default. The is especially true if we're hoping to get this upstream.

Reviewer 3: I would second that.

Author: I agree with that too. Would it be clearer to users if we added an explanation as a comment just before or inside the optio, e.g., 
```suggestion
# Default is OFF to support standalone builds
option(ACCESS3_MOM6  "Use ACCESS3 dependencies and install ACCESS3 libraries" OFF )
```

Reviewer 2: changed this to default OFF

option(OPENMP        "Enable OpenMP threading"                                OFF)

> option(MOM_SYMMETRIC "Use MOM symmetric memory"                               OFF)

Reviewer: Can we rename this to `"SYMMETRIC"`? Having `"MOM"` in the name made sense for the monolithic build, but it seems redundant here.

I also note that the MOM6 autoconf system has the option `--enable-asymmetric`. If we're hoping to get the cmake system upstream it might make sense to align ourselves with their logic now, i.e. have an `ASYMMETRIC` option that for now defaults to OFF.

Reviewer 3: > Can we rename this to "SYMMETRIC"? Having "MOM" in the name made sense for the monolithic build, but it seems redundant here.

Actually, CMake good practices would suggest to **add** the prefix to all options. This make it easier to build a CMake project from another CMake project. This is not something we are doing at ACCESS-NRI, but other groups might want to do it.

Reviewer: Okay, good to know. So we could have?
```
option(MOM6_ACCESS3    "Use ACCESS3 dependencies and install ACCESS3 libraries" OFF)
option(MOM6_OPENMP     "Enable OpenMP threading"                                OFF)
option(MOM6_ASYMMETRIC "Use MOM asymmetric memory"                              OFF)
```

Author: I agree. `MOM6_ASYMMETRIC ` would be better.

Reviewer 3: > Okay, good to know. So we could have?
> 
> ```
> option(MOM6_ACCESS3    "Use ACCESS3 dependencies and install ACCESS3 libraries" OFF)
> option(MOM6_OPENMP     "Enable OpenMP threading"                                OFF)
> option(MOM6_ASYMMETRIC "Use MOM asymmetric memory"                              OFF)
> ```

Yes. Probably should also rename `CESMCOUPLED` to `MOM6_CESMCOUPLED`.

Just to explain this further, the reason why one wants to have options with unique names is so that users can set them all separately.  Imagine you have a CMake project that builds both MOM6 and WW3. The users of that package might want to compile MOM6 with OpenMP, but WW3 without it (I don't know if WW3 uses OpenMP, but let's assume it does). There's not easy way to do it if both MOM6 and WW3 expose an option with the same name.

Reviewer 2: Im 100% sure you are correct - but I don't quite understand this usecase.

This CMakeList file defines a project already, and if I build MOM6 and WW3 in seperate projects, there's no namespace clash (I think). I can then find them in a different project through a `find_package()` call

Are you saying its possible to define a different cmake project which would build MOM6 using this CMakeLists file but be a different project ? (e.g. using `ExternalProject()` in [cmake](https://cmake.org/cmake/help/v3.31/module/ExternalProject.html)?)

Reviewer 3: > Are you saying its possible to define a different cmake project which would build MOM6 using this CMakeLists file but be a different project ? (e.g. using `ExternalProject()` in [cmake](https://cmake.org/cmake/help/v3.31/module/ExternalProject.html)?)

Yes, exactly. `FetchContent` is becoming a very powerful and popular approach to managing dependencies in CMake and, although we are not planning on using this feature at ACCESS-NRI, other people might. And since there's the ambition to have this CMake build system included upstream, better to follow best practices to make it work seamlessly.

Reviewer 2: Okie - i made the change to use MOM6 prefix everywhere and to flipped the option to be ASYMMETRIC default OFF

elseif(CMAKE_Fortran_COMPILER_ID MATCHES "Intel")
  set(CMAKE_Fortran_FLAGS "${CMAKE_Fortran_FLAGS} -qno-opt-dynamic-align  -convert big_endian -assume byterecl -ftz -traceback -assume realloc_lhs -fp-model precise -r8")
  set(CMAKE_Fortran_FLAGS_RELEASE "-O2 -debug minimal")
  set(CMAKE_Fortran_FLAGS_DEBUG "-O0 -g -check uninit -check bounds -check pointers -fpe0 -check noarg_temp_created")
else()
  message(WARNING "Fortran compiler with ID ${CMAKE_Fortran_COMPILER_ID} will be used with CMake default options")
endif()

# C compiler flags
if(CMAKE_C_COMPILER_ID MATCHES "GNU")
  set(CMAKE_C_FLAGS "${CMAKE_C_FLAGS} -std=gnu99")
  set(CMAKE_C_FLAGS_RELEASE "-O")
  set(CMAKE_C_FLAGS_DEBUG "-g -Wall -Og -fbacktrace -ffpe-trap=invalid,zero,overflow -fcheck=bounds")
elseif(CMAKE_C_COMPILER_ID MATCHES "Intel")
  set(CMAKE_C_FLAGS "${CMAKE_C_FLAGS} -traceback -qno-opt-dynamic-align -fp-model precise -std=gnu99")
  set(CMAKE_C_FLAGS_RELEASE "-O2 -debug minimal")
  set(CMAKE_C_FLAGS_DEBUG "-O0 -g")
else()
  message(WARNING "C compiler with ID ${CMAKE_C_COMPILER_ID} will be used with CMake default options")

> endif()

Reviewer: I'm not sure I understand the justification for choosing which flags are set here and which are set at a higher level. There seems to be a longer list here than what's included by default with the MOM6 autoconf system.

Reviewer 3: These flags were the ones used to build MOM6 in CESM, but this is not necessarily what we want going forward.

There are two types of flags that should go here:
- flags that are **necessary** for the code to work correctly (e.g., `-fdefault-real-8`)
- flags that are **recommended** for production and/or debug (e.g., `-O`, `-Wall`)

Users can then either append other flags or they can overwrite them entirely at their own risk.

This is a bit different from how this is normally set up in autotools based build systems (took me a while to get my head around this), so I wouldn't necessarily model it on the existing MOM6 autoconf system.

Reviewer 2: This should be the only place we have the set currently. You can also set them in spack but it's very easy to end up in a mess that way. 

Is it ok if we bump this to a new issue? These flags should be the same as the ones set in https://github.com/cOSIMA/access-om3 , and this needs a review of all components, confirming which flags are needed and then also optimising for performance.

Reviewer 2: See https://github.com/ACCESS-NRI/ACCESS-OM3/issues/73

> add_compile_definitions(_USE_GENERIC_TRACER _USE_MOM6_DIAG)

Reviewer: No change needed now but at some point we may want to make this a configurable option

Reviewer 2: Yes I think it's easy enough to add later without breaking any current behaviour

Author: I’m sorry if I’m misunderstanding, but if this change is going to happen someday, why not implement it now?

Reviewer 2: I'm trying to minimise adding options for "we may want this one day" to reduce complexity (which add testing and risk etc)

if (CESMCOUPLED)
  add_compile_definitions(CESMCOUPLED)
endif()

## Fortran modules path; currently this is simply set to be the include dir
set(CMAKE_INSTALL_MODULEDIR ${CMAKE_INSTALL_INCLUDEDIR}
  CACHE STRING
  "Fortran module installation path (Not a cmake native variable)"
)

#[==============================================================================[
#                              External packages                                #
#]==============================================================================]

> find_package(fms COMPONENTS R8 REQUIRED)

Reviewer: Just a note that I think [MOM6 requires FMS 2019.01.02 or newer](https://github.com/mom-ocean/MOM6/blob/e818ea4e792f0b85797247f955789b3c1210db8d/ac/configure.ac#L211-L224), though it's probably not worth trying to enforce this.

Reviewer 2: The first CMake build appears to be 2020.02

https://github.com/NOAA-GFDL/FMS/commit/6242dfeb066a209e4d4aad82235c54ee092857ae

Reviewer: Never mind then :)

if(NOT TARGET NetCDF::NetCDF_Fortran OR NOT TARGET NetCDF::NetCDF_C) #fms provides NETCDF inteface
  message(FATAL_ERROR "NetCDF interface missing from FMS package")
endif()
if (NOT NetCDF_PARALLEL)
    message(FATAL_ERROR "NetCDF does not have parallel I/O support!")
endif()

if (ACCESS3_MOM6)
  find_package(Access3Share REQUIRED cdeps timing share nuopc_cap_share)
  if(NOT TARGET ESMF::ESMF)
    message(FATAL_ERROR "ESMF interface missing from Access3Share package")  
  endif()
endif()

if(OPENMP)
  find_package(OpenMP REQUIRED COMPONENTS Fortran)
endif()

#[==============================================================================[
#                             Main definitions                                  #
#]==============================================================================]

### Targets

## MOM6 library

# set paths for the source code and config source
set(SRC "${CMAKE_SOURCE_DIR}/src")
set(CONFIG_SRC "${CMAKE_SOURCE_DIR}/config_src")

add_fortran_library(mom6lib mod STATIC)

target_include_directories(mom6lib PRIVATE $<BUILD_INTERFACE:${SRC}/framework>)

> if(ENABLE_MOM_SYMMETRIC)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
if(MOM_SYMMETRIC)
```

Reviewer 2: Done / superseeded by other changes

  ${SRC}/tracer/MOM_generic_tracer.F90
)

if (ACCESS3_MOM6)
  target_sources(mom6lib PRIVATE
  ${CONFIG_SRC}/drivers/nuopc_cap/mom_cap_time.F90
  ${CONFIG_SRC}/drivers/nuopc_cap/mom_cap_gtracer_flux.F90
  ${CONFIG_SRC}/drivers/nuopc_cap/mom_surface_forcing_nuopc.F90
  ${CONFIG_SRC}/drivers/nuopc_cap/ocn_comp_NUOPC.F90
  ${CONFIG_SRC}/drivers/nuopc_cap/time_utils.F90
  ${CONFIG_SRC}/drivers/nuopc_cap/mom_cap.F90
  ${CONFIG_SRC}/drivers/nuopc_cap/mom_cap_methods.F90
  ${CONFIG_SRC}/drivers/nuopc_cap/mom_ocean_model_nuopc.F90
  )
else()
  target_sources(mom6lib PRIVATE
  ${CONFIG_SRC}/drivers/solo_driver/MOM_surface_forcing.F90
  ${CONFIG_SRC}/drivers/solo_driver/MESO_surface_forcing.F90
  ${CONFIG_SRC}/drivers/solo_driver/user_surface_forcing.F90
  )
endif()

#[==============================================================================[
#                             Install or Export                                 #
#]==============================================================================]

## Library
if(ACCESS3_MOM6)
  set_target_properties(mom6lib PROPERTIES
    OUTPUT_NAME access-mom6lib
    EXPORT_NAME mom6lib
  )
  install(TARGETS mom6lib
    EXPORT Mom6libTargets

>     LIBRARY DESTINATION ${CMAKE_INSTALL_LIBDIR} COMPONENT AccessMOM6Cmeps_runtime NAMELINK_COMPONENT AccessMOM6Cmeps_Development

Reviewer: (This comment somehow didn't get included in my previous review, so reposting)

For my own learning, why is `NAMELINK_COMPONENT` needed here?

Also, could these names be shorter? Do we really need `"Cmeps"` in the name? What is the significance of the `"_Development"`?

Author: My understanding is `NAMELINK_COMPONENT` tells cmake to place symbolic links of AccessMOM6Cmeps_runtime to a separate place, in this case, AccessMOM6Cmeps_Development, which I think is used for development purpose. 

I think Cmeps follows the @micaeljtoliveira's configuration in COSIMA access-om3

_Development is just a conventional suffix, which is used to link and build but not for execution.

Reviewer: > My understanding is NAMELINK_COMPONENT tells cmake to place symbolic links of AccessMOM6Cmeps_runtime to a separate place, in this case, AccessMOM6Cmeps_Development, which I think is used for development purpose.

Thanks @minghangli-uni. Yeah, I read what it does, but I still don't think I understand why it's needed.

> I think Cmeps follows the @micaeljtoliveira's configuration in COSIMA access-om3

Hmmm, I [don't think so](https://github.com/COSIMA/access-om3/blob/58e40cb4381b094be739f408329ae0eaaaa99882/MOM6/CMakeLists.txt#L394-L395):

```
    LIBRARY DESTINATION ${CMAKE_INSTALL_LIBDIR} COMPONENT AccessOM3_RunTime NAMELINK_COMPONENT AccessOM3_Development
    ARCHIVE DESTINATION ${CMAKE_INSTALL_LIBDIR} COMPONENT AccessOM3_Development
```

Author: > Thanks @minghangli-uni. Yeah, I read what it does, but I still don't think I understand why it's needed.

It depends on the target groups. For end users, they only need the runtime component. I’m not entirely sure how the developer requirements are managed, probably @micaeljtoliveira would be better to comment this.

Reviewer 3: > For my own learning, why is NAMELINK_COMPONENT needed here?

First of all, it's important to note that artifacts of type `LIBRARY` are shared libraries on Linux. We haven't introduced the option to build shared libraries here yet, but doesn't hurt to set all these options correctly from the start ;)
  
When installing a shared library on Linux one also creates a symbolic link to the soname of the library:

`lib<name>.so -> lib<name>.so.1`

which is usually used at compile time. Here, `NAMELINK_COMPONENT` refers to that symbolic link.

>  What is the significance of the "_Development"?

CMake allow you to distinguish between components that are needed at runtime (for example an executable or a shared library) from components that are needed at build time (for example a static library). Convention is to name the former "Runtime" and the later as "Development" .

So, here we are basically telling CMake that, when the `mom6lib` target is a shared library, it should be installed to  `${CMAKE_INSTALL_LIBDIR}`, that the library itself is a component needed at runtime and the name link is a component needed at build time. Makes sense?

> Also, could these names be shorter? Do we really need "Cmeps" in the name?

No strong opinion on keeping or not "Cmeps" in the name. The `Access` prefix is probably enough to avoid name clashes, so should not hurt to remove it.

Reviewer: Thanks for that detailed explanation @micaeljtoliveira!

Reviewer 2: Okay i dropped Cmeps from the naems
